ADR: CommonJS and ESM decision (#323)
expressjs/discussions: docs/adr/isomorphism-support.md

## Submitters

- @kjugi
- @wesleytodd
- @ctcpip

## Decision Owners

- @expressjs/express-tc

## Context

The document's objective is to gather all notable comments and thoughts in one place and track potential changes in this topic. We have noticed that it is repeated frequently in many issues from the community and we need to take action.

Based on the comments in the issues we know that some of you might not feel happy about it. We have acknowledged the need and discussion around it touched on multiple scenarios. Including:
- rethinking the process and exposing both paths for all libraries
- expose both paths for selected libraries
- keeping default settings as the main target is on the server

**Why do we need this decision?**
- To reduce noise and maintain the ultimate answer for all of the issues.

**What problem does it solve or avoid?**
- General response to community request.

**Are there any existing issues/discussions/pull requests related to this?**
- https://github.com/pillarjs/router/issues/128
- https://github.com/expressjs/discussions/issues/297
- https://github.com/expressjs/express/discussions/6051
- https://github.com/jshttp/cookie/issues/211

## Decision

> During [working session](https://github.com/expressjs/discussions/issues/320) we have decided to not revisit, investigate or discuss this topic further. That means ESM exports won't be available for expressjs as well for pillarjs and jshttp packages.

Reviewer: This change suggests that you might accept PRs making the change; I’d probably add a sentence like “this also means PRs making this change will not be accepted”

> During [working session](https://github.com/expressjs/discussions/issues/320) we have decided to not revisit, investigate or discuss this topic further. That means ESM exports won't be available for expressjs as well for pillarjs and jshttp packages.

Author: both suggestions are applied in a separate commit. I'm resolving this thread

**What will be done?**

Future issues can be closed with a link to this document.

## Rationale

> CommonJS is the default node.js syntax. The JS world moved in the ESM direction as browsers consumed it well, and bundlers could make a tree-shake feature and dynamic imports. There is still a lot of baggage within the ESM itself and the way how we can use it. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
CommonJS is the default syntax in Node.js. While the JavaScript ecosystem has increasingly moved toward ESM due to its compatibility with browsers, enhanced tree-shaking capabilities, and support for dynamic imports, there are still complexities and challenges associated with ESM. 
```

Author: Not sure if I get that part:
> fwiw treeshaking CJS is identical to ESM in capability

based [on this](https://webpack.js.org/guides/tree-shaking/#conclusion) and [this](https://web.dev/articles/commonjs-larger-bundles)

> in order to take advantage of tree shaking, you must...
> - Use ES2015 module syntax (i.e. import and export).

Meanwhile I will accept this suggestion and we can update it again later if needed.

> To keep it short it's a whole new chapter to discuss and consider so it could use a lot of time and resources to make it properly. Don't get this wrong - it's not impossible tho! Most of our users will use the package in their project and pass it to the bundler which will produce the right format without any issues.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Adopting ESM for our libraries would require a significant investment of time and resources to ensure proper implementation and long-term maintenance. While it is not impossible to achieve, it represents a considerable effort. Moreover, the majority of our users already utilize our libraries in their projects, relying on bundlers to handle the necessary transformations without issues.
```

We have acknowledged the need and discussion around it touched on multiple scenarios. Including:
- rethinking the process and exposing both options (ESM and CommonJS) for all libraries
- expose both options (ESM and CommonJS) for selected libraries
- keeping default settings as the main target is on the server

**Why do we need this decision?**
We aimed to consolidate the Technical Committee's (TC) opinion on this topic. It is important to emphasize that Express is an HTTP framework specifically designed for Node.js. Over the years, technology has evolved, and new runtimes have emerged. Additionally, some of our libraries are being utilized by the community in other environments, such as browsers.

**What problem does it solve or avoid?**
Ambiguity and uncertainty for the community, alongside clear guidance for repository maintainers and contributors.

**Are there any existing issues/discussions/pull requests related to this?**
- https://github.com/pillarjs/router/issues/128
- https://github.com/expressjs/discussions/issues/297
- https://github.com/expressjs/express/discussions/6051
- https://github.com/jshttp/cookie/issues/211

## Decision

> During the [working session](https://github.com/expressjs/discussions/issues/320), we had an in-depth discussion about this topic. After careful consideration, we concluded that we will not make a dedicated effort to export our libraries in the ESM format. Instead, we will continue exporting the libraries as we have done historically. 

Reviewer 3: I would love to expose ESM and did so historically, I presume I should not since it’d be a dedicated effort?

Reviewer 4: Which packages export ESM today?

Reviewer 3: Historically I did it for path-to-regexp but removed it in the latest major to align with the TC, it wasn’t any additional overhead to maintain.

Author: Do you think I should include this fact from the past? I've been thinking about how to put this together now and I'm not sure.
The document should state the last known status. We can list exceptions now (if any) and explain this fact or update the document later when we agree on which one we want to change. There is a Changelog on the bottom so it should be easy to mark that out in the future.

Reviewer 5: We would need to change the phrase 'historically,' as it gives the impression that it was never done, but as Blake explains, it was done in some package.

Reviewer 4: Language has been updated to reflect reality, particularly that repo captains can decide what to do with packages they are responsible for.

> This decision is motivated by the lack of resources to maintain such an effort in the long term. It is also worth noting that Express is specifically designed to run with Node.js. While some of our libraries can be considered "isomorphic," this was unintended and can currently be classified as an "unofficial but functional feature." Consequently, our CI systems do not include browsers or other runtimes as part of their testing workflows.

Reviewer 3: Being isomorphic has been intentional for the packages I maintain, and I do make a dedicated effort to keep it isomorphic. This includes edge environments that are plain JavaScript. The lack of CI for these environments aren’t connected to their support.

Reviewer: I don't agree with that last statement; something isn't actually supported unless it's actually tested.

Reviewer 3: That’s a reasonable take, but doesn’t preclude that I do support them. Some things are unreasonable to have direct tests. There’s a reason we often only test each major node release instead of every single version, and we don’t claim those aren’t supported. It’s the same that I don’t test directly in CI for Cloudflare Workers (honestly not sure how I would tbh) but I do support them, by virtue of knowing it’s V8 and disallowing native node APIs.

Reviewer 3: TL;DR is that I don’t think this assertion belongs in the doc, something being isomorphic may be related but is not connected to ESM support. I don’t want to give an impression that some of the packages in these organizations are not designed to support other JavaScript environments, regardless of ESM support, since it could be referred to as a way to drop existing supported environments without a major.

Reviewer 4: I agree, we should decouple isomorphism from module system compatibility.  The root of this was that ESM exports would be justified for packages for which we wanted to support isomorphism.  In other words, if the package was not intended to be isomorphic, there is perceived little value in exporting ESM.

I also agree that we cannot (and should not attempt) to test against every possible environment.  However, isomorphic packages should get _some_ level of testing outside of node, and this should hopefully not be prohibitively difficult.

We have already [run into situations](https://github.com/pillarjs/router/issues/128#issuecomment-2435666417) where we are not certain if a package is properly working in other environments, in part due to lack of isomorphism in the test suite.

Reviewer: Packages can be perfectly isomorphic without ESM, though - it's only if someone insists on not having a build process that the module format makes a difference.

Reviewer 4: Absolutely.  I just think it's easier to justify if e.g. targeting the browser, not that it's necessarily required.

Reviewer 6: Do we have a list of examples where the docs or tests indicate browser support? Would just be good to have a clear list of the places we have stated a policy so we ensure any new work keeps in line with that.

I fully agree we should decouple ESM (this doc) from browser support, but I think it is reasonable to mention that ESM provides no benefits to server only libraries and that it informed our decision. Maybe we could make a small change like removing the "never intended" for softer language around that?

```suggestion
This decision is motivated by the lack of resources to maintain such an effort in the long term. It is also worth noting that Express was specifically designed to run with Node.js. While some of our libraries can run in other runtimes, this can currently be classified as an "unofficial and untested feature." Consequently, our CI systems do not include browsers or other runtimes as part of their testing workflows.
```

Reviewer 3: At a risk of derailing the topic I'll reply.

> However, isomorphic packages should get some level of testing outside of node, and this should hopefully not be prohibitively difficult.

Absolutely, but the overhead isn't valuable for some packages. In `path-to-regexp`, by not allowing `node` imports and testing on a minimum node version for JavaScript coverage I'm 99% of the way there. The 1% extra hasn't been worth the overhead (time and money) of e.g. an iOS Safari browser test suite hasn't been worth it, but if someone wanted to donate those things I wouldn't say no.

This wouldn't apply to something more complex that had code paths that change depending on their environment, but in this case it's just plain JavaScript with no dependencies.

> Do we have a list of examples where the docs or tests indicate browser support?

No, but I'm in favor of standardizing some way to indicate it.

 > I think it is reasonable to mention that ESM provides no benefits to server only libraries and that it informed our decision.

Dead code elimination can still be an issue for server environments, e.g. Cloudflare Workers has a 3MB limit. IIRC AWS Lambda and other platforms have similar requirements. I know dead code is meant to work with CommonJS but I haven't had much luck and ESM is the only time it actually works for me.

Reviewer: There's no technical difference between what static analysis is doable for CJS and ESM, so while the reality of tool support may differ, there's no actual justification for it.

Reviewer 3: Maybe but sadly we’re stuck with the tooling we have today, not the ideal world, so I thought it worth mentioning this isn’t just a browser concern.

Ref: https://github.com/evanw/esbuild/blob/main/docs/architecture.md#es6-linking

> This is possible with ES6 modules but not with CommonJS because ES6 imports are bound at compile time while CommonJS imports are bound at run time.

Just to be clear, I’m not at all advocating for ESM here, I’m only providing context on why it shouldn’t be dismissed as “it’s a browser thing”.

Reviewer: ESM imports can be static or dynamic; so can CJS requires - since tooling has to account for both, there's literally no technical difference between them. Nothing is possible for ESM that's not possible for CJS if you're talking about a build tool.

Reviewer 3: That sounds like something to take up with the tools, I’m just pointing out that common build tools (both Webpack and esbuild) require ESM for tree shaking, and these are common tools to bundle for server side environments that may have size limits (including ones that run node).

Again, don’t take this as arguing for ESM support in this thread, but to argue against that it’s only relevant for browsers.

Reviewer: I completely agree :-) i just think it's important to point out that it's a failing in the tools, not an inherent difference in the module format.

Author: Ok, I have applied some changes. Please verify. Also, I think I'm parking the "isomorphic" topic completely. As mentioned in the comments, let's focus on export type here. I can start another doc about isomorphic and its status right after this one if needed.

At present, our libraries function seamlessly in Node.js, supporting both CommonJS and ESM. Transitioning to support additional scenarios, such as direct ESM exports, would require significant changes to our CI systems and additional maintenance overhead.

> **TL;DR**: Dedicated ESM exports will not be available for Express.js, PillarJS, or JSHTTP packages. PR with such a change will not be accepted.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
**TL;DR**: Dedicated ESM exports will not be available for [expressjs](https://github.com/expressjs), [pillarjs](https://github.com/pillarjs), or [jshttp](https://github.com/jshttp) packages. PRs with such a change will not be accepted.
```

## Rationale

CommonJS is the default syntax in Node.js. While the JavaScript ecosystem has increasingly moved toward ESM due to its compatibility with browsers, enhanced tree-shaking capabilities, and support for dynamic imports, there are still complexities and challenges associated with ESM. 

Adopting ESM for our libraries would require a significant investment of time and resources to ensure proper implementation and long-term maintenance. While it is not impossible to achieve, it represents a considerable effort. Moreover, the majority of our users already utilize our libraries in their projects, relying on bundlers to handle the necessary transformations without issues.

- **Alternatives Considered:**
  - Alternative 1: Add ESM export to our libraries. CommonJS format is accepted by all most popular bundlers.
- **Pros and Cons**: Outline the pros and cons of the chosen solution.
- **Why is this decision the best option?** Time and energy can be shifted to other topics.

## Consequences

- **Positive Impact**: It does not require to support another set of tools and one more major (or at least big) release.
- **Negative Impact**:

>   - Packages can't be used in deno projects and potentially in other future runtime engines for JavaScript that decide to not support commonjs. That can be a potential user miss

Reviewer 4: this is not true though, right?   deno can indeed use cjs

Reviewer: can it? i thought jsr packages could be consumed by cjs but deno still can only consume esm packages

Reviewer 5: the premise of Deno was that it was only ESM, although I would have to verify it. Now you've made me doubt.

Reviewer 4: https://deno.com/blog/v2.0-release-candidate#improved-commonjs-support

Reviewer 5: Okay, they do support it, so it’s probably fine to say that only Deno 1 doesn’t support it, right?

Reviewer 4: I think we can just remove this line. or rather, change it to reflect that packages may or may not work in browser environments

Reviewer 5: +1 'may not work in browser environments.'

Author: Updated!

>   - OSS library authors that use our packages in ESM native libs might suffer from a lack of support

Reviewer 3: There is a greater negative impact which is that other users fork the packages to ESM and those packages lack security updates over time which leaves users in a worse position.

Author: That's a valid point! Added, thanks!
